---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/2/
type: stop
section_title: Greek and Roman Daily Life 
title: Greek Women
page_rank: 2
stop_id: 2
audio_file: NASA_main_Computers_are_in_Control.mp3
hero_images:
 - path: 02-second-stop-01.jpg.jpg
   alt_text: Gravestone for Theophile 
---

Greek women in ancient Athens usually lived under the protection of a male <i>kyrios</i> (guardian). This man might be the woman’s husband, father, or a male relative, and was responsible for her moral and legal welfare, and for managing her finances and dowry. A woman’s primary responsibility was to her husband or father, and to her household. This included bearing and raising children, and running the household more generally. As a result, and woman’s virtue was very important to her family. 

This large grave stele for the Athenian woman Theophile includes a poem, written in ancient Greek, listing her virtues. Theophile died in the 4th century BC and her family would have paid a considerable sum to set up this tombstone in the family burial plot facing a road into the city. The inscription reads: 

## ‘Records of your virtue, Theophile, will never pass unnoticed, modest and excellent and industrious, possessing every virtue.’ 

The scene that you can see above the inscription is a handshaking scene known as a dexiosis. A seated female figure grasps the right hand of a standing woman, a symbol of farewell.  This type of scene is very common on ancient Greek gravestones and combines three different ideas: parting (the family and deceased saying farewell to one another); reunion (the deceased being welcomed by their ancestors in the afterlife); and communion between the living and the dead (representative of the ongoing relationship between the deceased and their family). 

Together, the scene and inscription on this tombstone demonstrates the virtues that were considered important for women in ancient Athens to embody. Theophile’s modesty and domestic excellence are highlighted because they are virtues and behaviours expected of “good” Athenian women. These feminine virtues reflect positively on Theophile as an individual, and on her family as members of Greek society. 

> Image: Gravestone for Theophile, Athens, Greece, Marble, 400 - 350 BC. Excavated by Mr E Dodwell, Piraeus, Athens, 1805. Acquired by Sir H P Browne KP PC, 2nd Marques of Sligo, Westport House, Mayo Ireland, after 1805. Then by descent to Mr D E Browne, 10th Marques of Sligo, Westport House, Mayo, Ireland, 1958. Acquired by UK Private Collection, from Christie, Manson and Woods, London, 9 December 1958. UQ 14.001. 
