---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/3/
type: stop
section_title: Greek and Roman Daily Life
title: Slavery
page_rank: 3
stop_id: 3
audio_file: NASA_main_Go_at_Throttle_Up.mp3
hero_images:
 - path: 03-third-stop-01.jpg
   alt_text: Memorial Tablet for Secundio 

---

Slavery played a major role in both the Greek and Roman worlds and slaves were some of the most marginalised groups in Greco-Roman society. Many households had slaves who cooked, cleaned, and performed other domestic tasks. We also find slaves occupying numerous roles in Greek and Roman society from teachers, secretaries, doctors, and accountants, to tradespeople and labourers, hairdressers, waiters, and musicians. 

This marble memorial tablet tells us the name of two ancient Roman slaves. It is dedicated to a man named Secundio, a Roman slave who worked as sumptuarius or accountant in the household of a woman named Caelia. The tablet was set up by Secundio’s sister, Philema, who was also a slave. Philema’s job was to be a vestispica or wardrobe maid. The full inscription reads:

### ‘For Secundio, the accountant of Caelia, of 25 years. Philema, the wardrobe maid, (set this up) for her brother.’

The tablet would originally have identified a niche in a columbarium, a public structure for interring the ashes of the deceased. Both Secundio and Philema held important positions in their households, requiring special skills and responsibilities. The occupation of a slave was key to their identity in the Roman world – note in particular how Philema has chosen to include her occupation when she could have omitted this information. 

In Greece, it was almost unheard of that a slave would earn their freedom, but in Rome, manumission, or freeing a slave, became very common under the Empire and freed slaves would often join the household and take the name of their former master. Slaves are almost completely absent from the written historical record, and when they are mentioned, they are often anonymous. 

Can we get a full picture of ancient societies without considering the role, status and lives of marginalised people like slaves? 

> Image: Memorial Tablet for Secundio, Rome, Italy, AD 1 - 100. Sold by Bonhams, London, Lot 335, 23rd October 2012. Part of the Victor Gulotta Collection, Massachusetts, 2005-2012. Part of the Lowther Castle Collection, Penrith, Cumbria, United Kingdom, 1848-1947. Acquired by The Right Honourable, William Lowther, the 2nd Earl of Lonsdale, Lowther Castle, between 1848-1868, from the estate of The Right Honourable, Frederick Ponsonby, the 3rd Earl of Bessborogh 1793-1844.. UQ 13.020.
