---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/4/
type: stop
section_title: Clothing
title: Funerary Portrait of a Man
page_rank: 4
stop_id: 4
audio_file: stop_4.mp3
hero_images:
 - path: 04-fourth-stop-01.jpg.jpg
   alt_text: Palmyrene Funerary Portrait of a Man
---

## Simple Clothes
Greek and Roman clothing was mostly simple, made of wool, and largely undecorated. Of course, there are some notable exceptions such as imported silks, or clothes of bright colours, but these types of clothing belong to the very rich, or those thought to be lacking taste. 

Simple sleeveless tunics (<i>tunica</i> in Latin, or <i>chiton</i> in Greek) were the normal dress of both Greek and Roman men and women. To this, Greek women might add the <i>peplos</i>, a square piece of cloth pinned at the shoulders and gathered at the waist. Both men and women could wear the <i>himation</i>, a large piece of fabric used as a cloak. Roman women wore a cloak called a <i>palla</i> which could be almost 3m x 2m in size! For Roman men, their outer cloak was called the <i>toga</i>, a huge piece of semi-circular cloth which identified the wearer as a Roman citizen. 

## Clothes as Symbols
In this funerary relief from Roman era Palmyra in the Syrian Desert, a man shows off his toga, demonstrating his wealth, status and achievement in the local community. So powerful was the symbol of the toga that even in the far reaches of the empire men dressed like their well-to-do counterparts in the city of Rome. In fact, most Roman men didn’t actually wear the toga regularly as it was heavy, cumbersome and expensive, but it remained the ultimate status symbol. 

Clothing, therefore, was full of symbolic power for ancient people. It could show your social class, education, and political leanings. It could even expose your morals, like when the Roman statesman and moralist Seneca criticised men who wore exotic clothing for the purposes of self-promotion: 

### Those men… who wear cloaks of outlandish colours, who wear translucent togas… provoke censure, and in doing so, attract attention towards themselves.
> Seneca, Letters, 114.21

> Image: Grave-Marker for a Man, Palmyrene, Marble, AD 175-225. With Charles Ede Ltd, London, Cypriot and Roman Antiquities, Lot 15, 2005. Part of the GE Turner Collection, Amsterdam, c. 1960s - 2005. UQ 09.001. 
