---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/5/
type: stop
section_title: Greek and Roman Daily Life 
title: Personal hygiene
page_rank: 5
stop_id: 5
audio_file: NASA_main_Go_at_Throttle_Up.mp5
hero_images:
hero_images:
 - path: 05-fifth-stop-01.jpg.jpg
   alt_text: Bronze mirror front
 - path: 05-fifth-stop-02.jpg.jpg
   alt_text: Bronze mirror back

---

Personal hygiene and the use of cosmetics and jewellery were a common part of everyday life in ancient Greece and Rome, though some practices were far more common among the elite.

In Greece men might attend a public bath at the gymnasium or public training arena where citizens could exercise and discuss matters of the day. Both men and women could attend Roman baths called thermae. These could be huge complexes with hot and cold rooms, plunge pools and central heating. They were also a great place to socialise and show off your clothes and jewellery. Instead of soap, olive oil was the preferred cleanser in the ancient world.  

Each day, a rich ancient woman might style her hair, apply makeup, put on rings, earrings, bracelets or necklaces, and wear perfumed oil. An essential part of these daily routines were mirrors. This Etruscan mirror dates to the 4th century BC and unlike modern examples, ancient mirrors are usually made from highly polished bronze without a glass cover. This particular example has a handle made from turned bone, and a decorative reverse showing a seated warrior, a winged female, and a youth. Decorated mirrors were treasured possessions and might have been given as wedding gifts.

In literary accounts, women’s use of makeup or jewellery is often portrayed in a negative way, but the authors of these texts are always men. Such comments are often directed at specific women in an attempt to discredit them, their husband or their family. It is therefore important to consider the agenda of an author when reading negative descriptions of luxury in Greece and Rome. Material evidence, like this mirror, provide a much more balanced and realistic idea of how bathing, cosmetics and jewellery were part of daily life in the ancient world.

> Images: Mirror with Engraved Scene, Etruria, Italy, 400 - 300 BC. Purchased from Christie, Manson & Woods Ltd, London, with funds from the Castlehow Bequest, 1976. UQ 76.001.
