---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/6/
type: stop
section_title: Roman Women 
title: Portrait Head of a Matron
page_rank: 6
stop_id: 6
audio_file: stop_6.mp3
hero_images:
 - path: 06-sixth-stop-01.jpg.jpg
   alt_text: Portrait head 
---

## Viewing Women
Sculpture provides another way of viewing women and understanding their role in the ancient world. 

This is a large marble portrait head of a mature and dignified Roman woman dating to between 30 BC and AD 50. This was a period of immense change in Rome, which saw the end of the Republic and the beginning of what we know as the Imperial period. During this time, women, and their roles as daughters, mothers, and wives, became important symbols of the strength and unity of Rome. Critically, these roles are usually defined by their relationship to men. 

## Women's Virtues
This portrait shows an older woman, with a mantle or <i>palla</i> draped over her head. Her simple hairstyle is visible at the front. The head probably comes from a full-length commemorative or funerary statue, showing the woman wearing an ankle length stola or dress. The mantle covering the hair suggests that the woman may have been taking part in a religious ceremony, but also denotes her <i>pudicitia</i> (modesty and chastity) and <i>fides</i> (trustworthiness and honesty). These virtues were very important to Roman women, to their husbands and to their families, and are reflected in the way they presented themselves to the world in their clothing, hairstyle, grooming and personality. 

Roman literature suggests that this was the dress worn in public by respectable women not tempted by <i>luxuria</i>. 

Women in Rome had only one name, the feminine version of their father’s family name. For example, the daughter of Julius Caesar was known only as Julia. Most Roman women had a very limited role in public life – they could not attend or vote at public assemblies and they could not hold any position of political responsibility. 

Within Roman society, women were expected to act respectably and demonstrate “womanly” virtues such as piety, chastity, and modesty. 

> Image: Portrait Head of a Woman, Rome, Italy, marble, 30 BC - AD 50. Acquired by Paul E. Manheim, New York, c. 1968 Gifted to the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, 11/12/1968, Inv. No. 68.767. UQ 92.004
