---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/7/
type: stop
section_title: Greek and Roman Daily Life 
title: Entertainment 
page_rank: 7
stop_id: 7
audio_file: NASA_main_Go_at_Throttle_Up.mp7
hero_images:
hero_images:
 - path: 07-seventh-stop-01.jpg.jpg
   alt_text: Figurine of a Comic Actor 
 - path: 07-seventh-stop-02.jpg.jpg
 alt_text: Figurine of a Gladiator
---

## A favourite form of entertainment for the Greeks and Romans was the theatre. 

Greek theatre as we know it appeared around the 6th and 5th centuries BC and is associated with festivals of the god Dionysos. It played a very important role in the development of a Panhellenic or ‘Greek’ identity, by bringing together people to share dramatic productions of common myths, stories, songs and poems. 

The Greeks drew a formal distinction between different kinds of theatre. The two main types were tragedy and comedy, and we have many surviving examples of both types. With the spread of Greek culture into Rome, theatre increased in popularity and diversified, with new types of performance developing, such as pantomime. 

This terracotta figurine, probably a souvenir, depicts an actor sitting cross-legged on a bench with his chin resting on his right hand. He wears a comic mask, representing the Leading Slave of New Comedy. The second smaller mask resting on the bench beside him is also of the comic slave variety. 

Actors in Greece were always men, and always wore masks to show who their character was meant to be. Tragedies and Comedies were often a form of social commentary – nothing was off limits – topics such as class and gender conflict, violence, sex, politics, greed, treachery and betrayal, loyalty, heroism, and self-sacrifice were all explored in the realm of theatre.

When theatre spread to Rome, plays were first performed in Greek, and later the old Greek plays were translated into Latin. These ‘translations’ were more accurately ‘remakes’, with Latin authors freely adapting Greek originals to better suit Roman audiences. Theatre was an incredibly popular past time in ancient Greece and Rome. People of all background would come together in the theatre to watch stories being performed. 

> Image: Figurine of a Comic Actor, terracotta, AD 100 - 200. Part of the Dr. Daniel Marie Fouquet Collection, Cairo, 1850-1914. Sold by Drouot, Paris, Lot 430, 1922.

## Perhaps the most famous form of public entertainment in Rome were gladiatorial contests. 

Roman gladiators have no modern counterpart – although celebrated and loved, they fought for their lives at every performance, though rarely to the death. Many were slaves, criminals, captives, or prisoners-of-war, and outside of the arena they were scorned, rejected, and lived on the very fringes of society. Inside the arena, however, they demonstrated the warlike spirit and courage that was fundamental to the Roman character, and showed the militaristic qualities that were valued by the Romans above all else.

There were four main types of Roman gladiators – the <i>Secutor</i> (“Follower”), <i>Retiarius</i> (“Net Man”), <i>Murmillo</i> (“Fish”), and the <i>Thraex</i> (“Thracian”). These types are all identifiable by their distinctive weapons and armour. This figurine is probably a <i>Hoplomachus</i> or spear fighter. He has large greaves or leg armour, and in one hand would have held a long spear. In the other hand, now broken, he would have held a small shield. Images of gladiators and gladiatorial combats were common on all kinds of items used daily by the Romans: lamps, pottery, and other household items from knife handles to mirrors to perfume bottles. 

Alongside gladiatorial combats we also find other kinds of combat based entertainment That developed in the Roman world. One of these, the venationes or beast hunts pitted train beast fighters called bestiarii or criminals and prisoners against wild animals in the arena. During festivals and other special days, an entire day of entertainments could be viewed at the arena by the Roman populace, usually including beast hunts, gladiatorial combats, and public executions. These spectacles and their popularity at Rome gave rise to the famous saying by Juvenal that “bread and circuses” kept the Roman people satisfied and under control. 

