---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/8/
type: stop
section_title: Entertainment 
title: Figurine of Hoplomachus Gladiator
page_rank: 8
stop_id: 8
audio_file: NASA_main_Go_at_Throttle_Up.mp8
hero_images: 
hero_images:
 - path: 08-eighth-stop-01.jpg
alt_text: Figurine of a Gladiator
   
---

Perhaps the most famous form of public entertainment in Rome were gladiatorial contests. 

Roman gladiators have no modern counterpart – although celebrated and loved, they fought for their lives at every performance, though rarely to the death. Many were slaves, criminals, captives, or prisoners-of-war, and outside of the arena they were scorned, rejected, and lived on the very fringes of society. Inside the arena, however, they demonstrated the warlike spirit and courage that was fundamental to the Roman character, and showed the militaristic qualities that were valued by the Romans above all else.

There were four main types of Roman gladiators – the <i>Secutor</i> (“Follower”), <i>Retiarius</i> (“Net Man”), <i>Murmillo</i> (“Fish”), and the <i>Thraex</i> (“Thracian”). These types are all identifiable by their distinctive weapons and armour. This figurine is probably a <i>Hoplomachus</i> or spear fighter. He has large greaves or leg armour, and in one hand would have held a long spear. In the other hand, now broken, he would have held a small shield. Images of gladiators and gladiatorial combats were common on all kinds of items used daily by the Romans: lamps, pottery, and other household items from knife handles to mirrors to perfume bottles. 

Alongside gladiatorial combats we also find other kinds of combat based entertainment That developed in the Roman world. One of these, the venationes or beast hunts pitted train beast fighters called bestiarii or criminals and prisoners against wild animals in the arena. During festivals and other special days, an entire day of entertainments could be viewed at the arena by the Roman populace, usually including beast hunts, gladiatorial combats, and public executions. These spectacles and their popularity at Rome gave rise to the famous saying by Juvenal that “bread and circuses” kept the Roman people satisfied and under control. 

> Image: Figurine of Gladiator, Roman, Terracotta, AD 1 - 100. Purchased from Charles Ede Ltd, London, with funds donated by Dr D Watts, 2005. Acquired by General A Pitt-Rivers, from Mr GF Lawrence, London, 23/12/1896. Part of Pitt-Rivers Collection, Farnham, Dorset, 1883 - c. 1966. Part of Mr A Guttman Collection, Berlin, c. 1980 - 2004. Sold by Christies, London, Sale 5524, Lot 170, 28/04/2004. UQ 98.001
