---
layout: episode
permalink: /stops/9/
type: stop
section_title: Food
title: Apulian Red-Figure Fish-Plate 
page_rank: 9
stop_id: 9
audio_file: stop_9.mp3
hero_images:
 - path: 09-ninth-stop-01.jpg.jpg 
alt_text: Apulian Red-Figure Fish-Plate 

---

## Mediterranean Diet
The ancient Mediterranean diet primarily consisted of cereals (mainly wheat and barley, baked as bread or eaten as a porridge) and legumes (beans, peas, chickpeas, lentils). Olive oil was also used extensively and wine was the most common drink, even for children, although it was always watered down. Other important ingredients included honey for sweetness, and fruits and vegetables like onion, cabbage, celery, apples, figs and grapes. Meat was less important than in our own diet. 

There was a large variety of fish and seafood available in the Mediterranean and our literary sources suggest seafood such as crabs, crayfish, oysters, mussels, snails, and cuttlefish were all eaten by ancient people. Preserved fish was affordable for a relatively wide range of social classes, however, fresh-caught, high quality fish of a certain size remained reserved for the wealthy. 

## Eating Fish
This plate from Apulia in southern Italy provides some insight into the diet of the ancient Greeks. It is made from terracotta and is decorated with three large fish, one smaller fish, and a series of shellfish. Because fish and meat only supplemented the main parts of the meal, they might have been served on special plates like this, with a central depressed area to hold oil or a sauce. As fish plates were commonly found in tombs, the plate could also be used as a funerary offering, perhaps in banquets for the dead.

The Romans were particularly fond of fermented fish sauces to add flavour to foods. The most well-know of these was <i>garum</i>, a sauce made from fermented fish guts, fish heads, and any other fish waste soaked in salt, olive oil, and herbs. This rotten fishy mixture was strained to remove the chunky bits until it reached a fine liquid form. 

> Image: Fish Plate, Greek, Apulia, Italy, Terracotta, 400-300 BC. Purchased from Christie, Manson & Woods Ltd, London, 1982. UQ 82.034
